\chapter{Dataset availability and usage}
\doublespace

Three open experimental datasets were produced from the work described in
Chapters~\ref{chap:RVAT-baseline}, \ref{chap:Re-dep}, and \ref{chap:RM2}. These
datasets are based around Git version control repositories, which include
histories of all changes made to configuration files, documentation, processed
or derived data, and code used to process and visualize the data. At the time of
writing, these are primarily distributed via the Git repository hosting site
GitHub.com. Specific releases or snapshots of the repositories have been
archived via Figshare.com, which provides digital object identifiers (DOIs). The
Figshare archives thereby provide persistent links, which are cited in the
publications where the data was used. Note that presently, prospective users are
pointed to the repositories on GitHub to ensure they obtain the most recent
version, and may take advantage of some of GitHub's collaboration features,
e.g., issues, wikis, and pull requests.

This appendix contains instructions for using the RM2 tow tank dataset, though
instructions for the UNH-RVAT baseline and UNH-RVAT Reynolds number dependence
datasets are similar. However, it should be noted that an object-oriented
interface was not implemented for the UNH-RVAT baseline processing software,
though the top-level scripts are similar. Also note that the documentation below
was automatically generated from the RM2 tow tank experiment's wiki on GitHub
(\url{https://github.com/UNH-CORE/RM2-tow-tank/wiki}), which was deemed to be as
accurate as possible at the time of this writing, though may evolve as the
repository evolves. Therefore, the wiki should be consulted for the most
up-to-date documentation, if possible.

\lstset{basicstyle=\linespread{0.55}\ttfamily}

\input{appendices/rm2-wiki-home}
